Hello, everyone. Thank you for coming. My name is Natalia Andrychuk, and I'm a statistical
data scientist at our Center of Excellence. And today I'm here to talk about what it takes
to build a community of engaged R users and how we approach this at Pfizer. But first,
let me take a step back and answer the question of why building community was important for
us. Here's my favorite quote from Alice in Wonderland. My dear, here we must run as fast
as we can, just to stay in place. And if we want to go anywhere, you must run twice as
fast as that. And in my opinion, this perfectly describes what's happening in the pharma world
when it comes to adoption of R. And I won't be diving into details of why this is happening.
I just want to let you know that Pfizer is not an exception, and R adoption happening
fast. So building the community, connecting people and their experiences is very vital
for success. But what if we approached building the community like the README file for our
project or package? README file is very essential, and I'm sure a lot of you in this room either
interacted with the README file or created one. This is the first file that programmers
read when they actually approach your project. So let's look at the typical structure of
the README file together, and I'll let you know how this translates into the community
building terms. When you open the README file, the first thing you look for is the installation
instructions, how to install the package. Is it on CRAN? Is it on GitHub? Are there
any dependencies you have to take into account? This is the foundational knowledge you need
to obtain in order to move forward with installing the package. You can't move forward without
that. And in the community building terms, this translates into establishing the foundation
for your community. And to be successful in it, you need to assemble a dedicated team
of colleagues who will take on the community building project and will make it their priority.
And we do have such team at Pfizer, and I'm very lucky to be a part of it. And at Pfizer,
we have the R-SWAT team. This is our SWAT team. It's part of a bigger RCOE team. And
the SWAT stands for scientific workflows and analytic tools. We're very proud of this acronym.
We are the internal consultancy group for those parts of organizations that don't have
experts on hand. So we are the art experts. And on top of that, we are the professional
community builders. Building the community is not our side project. This is one of our
priorities. So we have the community building initiatives in our semester goals, and we
treat it as a project deliverables. Because if we won't do that, then there always will
be the project that's going to supersede community building initiatives, and the process
would be slow. However, it's very important to acknowledge that we won't be able to make
the progress that we made without the help of our IT experts. Because we're our community
builders, and we need our infrastructure to achieve our goals and the goals of our colleagues.
At Pfizer, we use a suite of professional tools to support our projects, and our IT
experts support all of them. And the SWAT team works closely with IT to define the best
practices. We also have regular check-ins to address any questions or concerns we as
a team have and our colleagues have. So we're this connector between our programmers and
the IT department. And the relationships we established with the IT colleagues help us
to support our community. Having tools is great, but we all know that we need a proper
documentation for those tools. And we needed a single source of truth and a single source
of documentation where our colleagues can access all the documentation regardless of
where they are in the world at any given time. So for us, the R at Pfizer conference became
this single source of truth. So the conference website is an internal website where we host
all our documentation, how-to articles. We promote best practices. And this is also the
place where our IT colleagues post all their best practices, guides, and information.
And the rule of thumb is, if we get the same question from multiple colleagues a few times,
we need to write a knowledge article on it and post it to the conference website. With
this, we accomplish a few things. So first of all, we're saving ourselves time in the
long run because we're only publishing the article once. Of course, we need to maintain
it, but the bulk of work done just once. And then the second thing is that everyone will
get the same uniform advice to the question they ask, the advice that we as a team agreed
on if this is consolidated in the knowledge article.
Perfect. We went through the first part of our readme, the foundation part. So let's
go back to the typical package readme and see what the next section is. And the next
section is usage. So you install the package, and now it's time to dive in and learn whether
the key functionality of your package and learn whether the key functions of the package
are. And in the community building terms, this translates into creating, delivering,
and maintaining proper training for your colleagues. Everyone's learning approach is different,
and everybody can be in different places when it comes to their R journey. So it was very
important for us to deliver training that will fit everyone.
We all learn programming by doing. Therefore, we create this series of hands-on mini projects
where our colleagues can get their hands dirty. So far, we have 13 R projects. Those are the
R Markdown files, and each R Markdown file dedicated to a specific topic can be how to
create a function or visualize the data. And all of the exercises are relevant to clinical
programming, so they're relevant to our colleagues' day-to-day job. Trainees can access those
exercises at any given time, and they can perform them and complete the challenge at
the end at their own pace. It's also important to learn from experts.
Therefore, we make an effort to, once in a while, invite the expert from POSIT or within
our own Pfizer organization, and they can come in and give a training on a dedicated
topic. Again, it can be a workflow or a package. And then we record all those sessions. Those
are typically one- to two-hour sessions, and then we post it to Microsoft Teams channel.
And we have a bunch of recordings, so we divided them into sections. For example, master the
tidyverse training sessions are the videos where each recording dedicated to, for example,
the tidyverse package. And the R for beginners, those are the videos with the beginner-friendly
topics. They're very short videos, actually. However, we all know that R is moving fast,
so you recorded the training today, you post it, and then tomorrow they release the new
version of this package or the new function. So we have a couple of initiatives to keep
our colleagues updated. In the function of the week initiative, we highlight and we post
about the function we want to highlight, and we find it very useful into day-to-day
programmer's life. And in the package of the month initiative, every month or every other
month, we release a little training, the R markdown for the package of the month that
colleagues can download and go through. We also utilize a form of newsletters to distribute
knowledge. So there are two types of newsletters we distribute. Advances in our newsletter
is the one that highlights latest and greatest in our community and in our tools, and it's
also pharma-tailored, so it's very Pfizer-focused. And in external outreach newsletter, our colleagues
who are involved in external initiatives, like FUSE, our consortium, they highlight
their group's latest updates, upcoming events, and the working group progress. Perfect. We
finished the second section of our readme, and now let's move on to the last and my favorite
part on how to contribute back. So in your typical readme package, there's always a section
on how to contribute back, because open source projects, they encourage collaboration and
they encourage innovation. And maybe you downloaded the package, you played with it a bit, and
then you found a bug and you want to propose the solution, or maybe you would want to request
the feature. And in the community-building terms, this is actually perfect as is. That
doesn't translate. And I want to emphasize that I notice this is a common misconception,
that you have to be a seasoned programmer in order to contribute back to the community.
To prove that this is not true, I want to show you a quick example. This is the issues
tab of the GitHub page for the very well-known package, usethis. And you can see there are
a lot of issues filed for this package. This package is by thousands of programmers. And
each issue has a tag associated. And amongst those tags, you can find a good first issue.
This shows that even the most complex projects, that they have tasks that can be achieved
and that can be done by beginner programmers. So by picking up this issue, working on it,
and contributing the results of your work back, you're helping yourself, you're learning
new things, as well as helping programmers who are developing the package and programmers
who are going to use this package. We kept this in mind as community builders when we
were creating the initiatives and tools where our colleagues can contribute back. So let's
take a look at a few of those. First and foremost, anyone can join the R and
Fizer Microsoft Teams channel, comprising over 1,100 colleagues so far. It's a great
resource for sharing news and answering and asking questions. And sometimes when you're
battling the programming issue, it might seem like you're the only one in this world facing
this very niche issue. But a lot of times you're not. There's always someone out there
who already solved this issue and has a solution for you. Or there's someone who's battling
the same issue and you can join forces and look for the solution together. So by asking
the question on Microsoft Teams channel, our colleagues are getting closer to solving the
issues they have. And then once they build the expertise, they can also contribute to
the community, give back, and assist others by answering their questions.
Another great initiative I would like to highlight, one of my favorites, is the Book Club. We
established the Book Club earlier this year and we picked an R for Data Science second
edition book. And this is a great initiative for our colleagues to collaborate and put
the time dedicated to learning new things in their day-to-day schedule. So we initially
had 130 people sign up for the Book Club. And our colleagues were divided into 14 different
groups. And the geography for those groups spans from North America through Europe to
Asia. And we divided those groups so that it's the same time zone and also we have different
expertise level in the same group for our colleagues. And each group has a dedicated
group lead. And throughout the time of like working on this initiative and leading one
of the groups, we learned that one of the biggest obstacle for this particular initiative
is the day job commitments. As the day job commitments increase, it becomes harder for
colleagues to join the session and read the book on a dedicated scheduled basis. However,
for those teams that became tight-knit and for those colleagues who are very consistent
in reading the book and joining the session, even if they haven't had a chance to read
the chapter that week, we received incredibly positive feedback and willingness to join
Book Clubs in the future. The Community of Practice event is a monthly
meeting where we have two 20-minute presentations followed by 10-minute questions. And this
is not an exclusive event. Anyone can get on the schedule and showcase their art projects,
lessons learned, and ask for the feedback. The presentations vary in scope to keep all
colleagues engaged. And this is a formal event. So the presentations are recorded and they're
prepared in advance. So this is one of the ways you can contribute back. However, there
is another one which is informal event. We adopted the Data Science Hangout event led
by Rachel Dempsey at Posit. So if you haven't heard of the Data Science Hangout, it happens
every Thursday at noon Eastern Standard Time. And anyone from the data science community
can join. So please join if you haven't already. So similarly, our internal Art Advisor Hangout
happens every other Wednesday. And anyone from Pfizer interested in our programming
can join. During this event, we invite a featured colleague. It's our guest. And we ask our
colleague different questions. For example, their art journey, what excites them about
art, what projects they're working on. And this is the informal event. So all the questions
are audience-led. And this is also not recorded, just in case you want to ask interesting questions.
And here you have it. We successfully went through all of the sections of our readme.
And now it's time to summarize why we put so much effort into creating this community
and building it. Building a community is like putting the puzzle pieces together. It's hard
at times. It's time-consuming, but very rewarding. Because engaged community solves business
problems faster in a more efficient way by connecting people and their experiences. It
promotes knowledge sharing, collaboration, innovation. And if you are just starting your
community building journey or thinking about one, just remember to be patient. We at Pfizer
are trying out different formats to keep our community engaged. And some of them are getting
traction right away. Others take time to get on track. However, we know that being consistent
and persistent and listening to our colleagues' feedback is the key to figuring out what works
best for the organization. And with that, I would like to thank you. Please feel free
to scan the QR code to connect and view some other resources that I linked.